the first Deputy permanent
representative of the Russian Federation
to the United Nations and uh it's yeah
wonderful to be able to speak with you
especially in this uh diplomatic
interesting times uh as we've seen the
yeah the Trump Administration appears to
go from Biden's Forever War to uh well
seemingly seeking a piece but uh uh a
lot of us were a little bit perplexed I
guess by the the ceasefire because the
the Russian position seem to very clear
that they wanted a political solution
not just a ceasefire which wouldn't be
used to
any clear purpose so I wanted to he how
to get your take on this how how you
understanding the new American
approach well I think that the uh main
idea was to uh get something from
Ukraine something that will be different
from uh
previous narrative that they were
pushing and they succeeded in this
because you see that all of a sudden
Ukrainian officials uh I don't know what
were the arguments that the US side used
but all of a sudden they started to uh
to to sing a different tune uh before
that zansky himself was saying that
there will be no ceasefire because
ceasefire is in Russian interests and
Ukraine will never agree to this without
guarantees and so on and so forth but
but all of a sudden after the meeting in
jida they started to say that yes we are
in favor of ceasefire now the ball is in
Russia's field and you will see that
Russia doesn't want want uh peace and
that was all games and all all these
things for them it was kind of a
maneuver with which I think they wanted
to put us in a position uh which
wouldn't be to comfortable because
previously we repeatedly uh explained
that it's not about SE fire of course
there will be a ceasefire at some point
but uh before we come to this uh it's
it's a big work uh to be done and uh
it's about the root causes uh it's it's
about the situation what will happen
during this cire and this is exactly
what my
president uh and other officials
explained that uh they accept this
proposal of President Trump because the
ceasefire is a good thing but ceasefire
alone will not solve this uh issue this
crisis uh we had ceasefire in the
framework of Minsk agreements the
ceasefire which was allegedly monitored
by the occe uh and it led to more bitter
and more severe hostilities and Ukraine
was using it as a smoke screen to rearm
and uh uh Western countries uh were not
uh doing uh this in good face so we all
know the story that's that's why of
course uh nobody is speaking in Russia
about uh about 30-day ceasefire as
ceasefire without getting anything uh in
exchange we say that we need to
understand the details of of us
proposals what will Ukraine do in the
meantime because Ukraine had already is
already starting to uh to speculate that
it would be a good opportunity to rearm
uh to to bring uh more soldiers to the
front line uh some some and European
politicians are also uh promoting the
same logic and in our understanding this
is totally different to the logic of
President Trump because he wanted to
ceas fire to be something that would
lead to a lasting uh peace between uh
Russia and Ukraine and it will not be
the case for sure so if we just agree to
30-day ceas fire of course Ukraine will
try to uh to heal its wounds and to
rearm and posties will happen inevitably
at the end of the ceasefire and uh I
think that was the core of ouros uh we
want more explanation from the US a more
detailed plan not only to declare
ceasefire but what accompanies this
ceasefire what uh is uh the task the
task of this ceasefire what are the
parameters of the uh of the uh agreement
uh or deal as president Trump lik to put
it we we need to know all the details
and of course uh there is no longer
trust to the European side uh there is
there is and there will be no trust to
the KF regime which has repeatedly
deceived uh not only Russia but its own
citizens so I think we need to be more
uh to behave in a more adult uh way you
know not like childish uh Joy about
about declaring ceasefire and thinking
that it will solve all the problems on
the
ground I I was reading Mr Trump's two
posts to through social posts today two
things struck me immediately when I read
them the first is that he seemed to be
looking at negotiations directly between
Russia and the United States um this
follows from the previous admissions
that this has been a proxy war between
Russia and the United States in his
first post he doesn't even mention
Ukraine and um he also in the second
post talks about a
ceasefire and a final agreement and that
is the necessity the thing to achieve so
I think that actually can I just say
ambassador to me that look like a
significant shift by the Americans by
the president of the United States
towards the Russian position but can I
ask a very simple very practical
question
what is the extent of the contact now
between the United States and Russia I
mean there was talk about your embassies
being restarted when we last spoke I
remember that there was still
difficulties having Communications
between the two governments um the
president your president today has
talked about relations being
reestablished at various levels but this
been very complicated are there now
proper contacts between the Russian
delegation and the American delegation
at the United Nations I mean is this
freeze uh coming to an
end uh thank you Alexander but I would
correct you a little bit I think that
the new uh roric of of President Trump
is not uh you know siding with Russia's
position but it's more siding with the
common sense and with the reality and
that's how it looked like I don't think
he's doing this because he's fan of
Russia what he he understands he has the
understanding of the real situation
unlike unlike K regime which makes
absolutely propagandic prop propagandist
moves and declarations president Trump
has information about situation on the
ground and we also need to mention
another another post social media that
he made today and this was about the ksk
the ksk incursion which is uh coming to
the end you know that there was a very
brave uh operation uh by by Russian uh
parat Troopers and soldiers recently
when 800 people used the the pipe uh The
Gas Pipe uh to come into the areas of uh
of the Ukrainian troops in suja in the
biggest city of the of the territory
that is under their control and there
was a complete Fiasco Fiasco for the
Ukrainian Army and now uh 9/10 of the
territory that they were holding uh 5
days ago is already liberated and the
rest is either encircled or they are
fleeing with terrible losses of course
nobody is able to use any armored
vehicles it's only possible to to walk
and with all the risks that it entails
so president Trump knows it only
president zilinski can can claim uh that
Ukraine is still in control of suja as
as he is doing he as his and his
commanders but ukrainians know the truth
and president Trump understands that
there is a big big number of ukrainians
in circled uh he said thousands of them
I don't have the figures of course but I
think that is very close to the truth
and of course as you understand we have
absolutely no no reasons to be very
merciful to these people because these
people were committing terrible crimes
in ksk region they uh they were acting
like barbarians uh like like German
fascists and they were cosplaying German
fascists very often specifically to make
make it more difficult for elderly
generation living there uh to put up
with the reality so these people are en
circled and of course uh if they try to
uh resist uh there is very very little
motivation of our soldiers uh to to to
to leave them alive but president Trump
asked President Putin to be merciful and
he responded he said yes okay we he to
this request to this uh demand and we
are ready to save life to everybody who
lays down its arms and surrenders which
needs of course a uh an order from Kev
uh to do so and president zansi is not
ready to do this order because for him
it's more important to show that his
Adventure is still ongoing and he's
absolutely not caring about the life of
of Ukrainian soldiers of conscripts of
of the others who are there so this is
this was also very important uh if we
speak about president Trump's uh post on
social media coming back to your
question I would say that we started a
dialogue this dialogue is multifaceted
and one of the components of this
dialogue is uh situation with uh
diplomatic representations in in Russia
and the uh and the us including our
mission our mission has a very specific
situation because um it's not we don't
have
counterparts the side so Embassy if
there is an act against an embassy then
of course there can be retaliation
against an embassy but we are somewhere
in between we don't have counterparts
that's why uh sometimes we Face certain
problems that even Embassy doesn't face
so this dialogue has only started we had
a meeting at uh at level of senior
experts at the level of senior experts
which took place in Istanbul which uh
allowed us to to compare notes and to
touch base of where we are but so far
from the US side we see the previous
team it's maybe having a bit different
instructions it has certain incentives
to be more forthcoming but it's the same
team team and the same faces and of
course uh they also brought the same
speaking notes only a little bit you
know adapted to the situation so uh I I
can't say it's it's a breakthrough so
far but the dialogue will continue in
terms of the situation of diplomatic
representations and there will be at
least uh a couple of meetings before I
assume before meeting of meetings
meeting of the presidents which is uh
planned but we don't have the the date
yet because it should be thoroughly
prepared apart from this uh there are
other I would say situations when we
when we can work together and and US s
is already ready to to do so I will give
you the concrete example examples from
my uh from my experience so uh Russia
and the US jointly proposed a
presidential statement draft
presidential statement of the UN
Security Council in Syria after this
terrible situation in Western Syria I
think we we both were appalled by this
we both uh said said that the the
council needs to act the council needs
to uh to ask for accountability for
investigation and we we all care about
about the future of Syria we all want
this country to be peaceful inclusive uh
uh whatever but not everything that is
happening there is really uh looks looks
optimistic to us and we together uh put
aside all the problems that we had on
Syria before of course we don't look at
eye to eye we have
different perception of the past of the
immediate past but right now we managed
to work together and we proposed the
statement which was adopted today it's a
very important document I don't
recall uh any document of Security
Council so meaningful on Syria apart
from humanitarian resolutions but there
were no political resolutions on Syria
since uh 2254 the resolution which was
adopted like 20 years ago so uh not not
20 10 years ago sorry so this is
important and this is already a concrete
result of um of us restarting a dialogue
Dialogue on many issues and it will be
uh beneficial for the whole of the world
when Russia and us speak it doesn't mean
that we see eye to ey to world's
problems it doesn't seem that we want to
achieve 100% understanding from the US
side and vice versa of course there will
be issues where we'll be absolutely uh
on different uh positions but it is
important for the whole world that we
speak because that is something that was
lacking very much when big Powers not
only Russia and the US I think that if
this dialogue was joined by by China by
by some other countries influential
countries from Global South uh even by
the European Union but Europeans
Unfortunately they have absolutely
different plan in their head and they
really all they care about is uh make
making problems for Russia and weakening
Russia with the hand of ukrainians that
I think that's the only strategy that
they have they don't have plan B and
they don't behave behave like adults
frankly in this situation so Russia and
the us we started to behave like adults
in the room and I think many countries
felt this after this common move in the
security Council and I hope that there
will be more to come a lot of regional
issues also need our cooperation and
this gives of course a lot of optimism
uh as far as Ukraine is concerned
because Americans are AB absolutely
ready to listen to us to take on board
our preoccupations and to really
understand that it is not something that
we uh want because of our capriciousness
but it's because of the reality it's
because of History it's because of
situation on the ground and it's because
of our desire not to repeat this
terrible experience that we faced uh in
Ukraine and Ukraine itself faced for at
least a decade and even
more yeah I noticed uh well we always
almost get used to the idea that these
two giants Russia and the United States
will always be on opposite side in the
United Nations so I certainly saw it
with great optimism that uh yeah they
voted the same way at the UN it's uh
over yeah the Syrian issue as well it's
uh yeah really yeah remarkable and again
doesn't mean that they have to agree on
everything but that uh that is some
things to agree on the normalizing
relations is quite important but you did
mention the the collapse of K and I'm
always asked uh by different journalists
what I think about where Russia's
incentives is because on one hand that
the argument would be that now that
Russia's obviously winning the war if it
just goes for full Victory it can
dictate the outcome to make sure this
there won't be any efforts to revive the
conflicts later on the other hand Russia
has an interest in finding
solution to the not just Ukraine but the
underlying problem primarily then the
failure and collapse of the European SEC
security architecture originating from
the failure to actually include Russia
in it after the Cold War so uh how do
you have any calculation in terms of
this what is the benefit for you know
Victory or diplomatic solution or
because there's very very little trust
at the moment uh in any anything that's
signed and written uh I guess all all
sides are a bit distrustful this days so
how how is I guess Moscow looking at
this well I don't think that we are
betting uh only on President Trump's
leverage uh on Europe and uh Ukraine uh
we are doing what we're supposed to do
we are continuing our special military
operation and we have quite distinct
goals uh we repeated their goals uh they
are very clear they're reasonable we
want to see uh on on our ERS a
predictable peace loving neighbor who is
not abusing the rights of Russian
speaking population who is not
glorifying Nazism who is
not Prosecuting a canonical Orthodox
Church uh nothing on top of this
everything very normal and uh we
declared these goals from day one and we
also from day one we said that we are
ready to see the implementation of these
goals on the on the ground through
diplomatic means we are ready to stop at
any moment uh we were ready to stop in
April
202022 in Istanbul when the draft was
initialed and you know
the nefarious influence of the Brits and
and Americans who intervened and talked
ziny out of accepting the deal which was
very beneficial uh for Ukraine uh at
this moment given what what they have
now we were ready to do it later at any
stage in any
uh our statement in the security Council
which happened uh at least one once per
month we were saying that we're ready
for uh for diplomatic solution but the
solution that would address root causes
of Ukrainian crisis because we don't
want want its repetition and the root
causes are very deep and you're
absolutely right that they are rooted
not only in the situation in ukra
Ukraine itself but they are rooted in
the expansion of NATO they are rooted in
Reckless policy of European countries of
uh of russophobia that is that has been
brought uh to the heads of European
leaders by Baltic states and Poland
quite successfully this virus is is very
uh visible right now in the heads of
many politicians so it all implies that
uh we uh are not sitting and waiting for
somebody to come and solve our problem
with Ukraine we're ready to do it
ourselves and president Trump fully
understands that
uh he he said it himself you remember
you remember this this uh ugly
conversation that they had with with
zilinski he said you have you have no
cards in your
hands you have no cards in your hands he
he's he's a realist he understands the
situation on the ground now despite all
the propaganda efforts of zelanski to to
show to his countrymen that this was a a
great master plan in the K region that
they really wanted to achieve some goals
and that goals were achieved the
question is what goals were achieved to
kill Russian civilians uh and to let uh
about 70,000 ukrainians die in in in in
Sp regions to to lose a lot of
ammunition that was the master plan and
of course it led to the collapse of the
Eastern front so un likee unlike him
president Trump who has uh necessary
intelligence who has the data from
satellites uh from intelligence Services
he understands the real situation he
understands that Ukraine is losing
he understands that Ukraine is not only
out of K region almost out but uh the
bordering regions of Ukraine are in
danger because we understand that we
need to have a buffer zone and president
said it openly that we need a buffer
zone uh to prevent such Adventures of KF
regime to happen in the future that was
not the plan before K but this is the
plan now and I think we have every
reason to implement this plan so
president Trump knows the situation on
the ground he knows that the time is not
laying in the hands of Ukraine if if if
he waits if Ukraine Waits then the
situation on the battle Battlefield
would be much worse and the conditions
negotiating conditions will be much
worse and he is not uh aware of anything
that really can change uh this can
upturn the the T the table because
Ukraine doesn't have any and any wonder
waffle uh that would change the course
of the of the war in its favor and uh
Ukrainian uh Ukrainian Army doesn't have
the resources of its own almost the only
the uavs maybe but this is not something
that is sufficient by itself uh to to to
win the war the European uh backers of
Ukraine are also have also have very few
resources to help them financially and
in terms of ammunition and uh U and
warfare so he he knows the reality and
he takes a decision and this decision is
that uh this should be stopped as soon
as possible uh for the sake of Ukraine
for the sake of Ukrainian people because
the more they wait uh the less it will
remain of Ukraine and the less chances
of course the Ukraine will have uh to
get uh something better uh than it can
get now so uh this is the reality he
understands this reality and that's why
he proceeds uh from from this reality
and uh again as for us we are we are
doing what we were doing we are fighting
uh we are defeating the the regime and
we will do so uh awaiting uh serious
meaningful proposal uh with guarantees
with all the necessary outline of how it
will look like and then we'll see and
then we'll see because it it goes
totally in what we were uh saying from
day one about diplomatic solution to
this uh to this issue which should imply
uh the addressing of the root causes of
the Ukrainian
crisis Ambassador um I'm not going I'm
going to say thank you to for your very
comprehensive answers I know that you
are under always uh that you have time
needs but as I said they're very clear
very comprehensive answers and I just
want to say thank you for providing
them yeah thank you thank you very much
thank you guys see you